EXCEL Trip Leader Manual 2024-25
Key Contacts:


Director of EXCEL (HAC 214):                Laura Neubauer
EXCEL Travel Office (HAC 213):         Hannah Puckett
Liz Benjamin-Alcayaga 
Ethan George


Health Office                                Lisa O’Connor 


Table of Contents
1. Important Dates for Leaders 2024-25
2. Introduction                                                
   1. Purpose of the Manual                                
   2. Travel Mission Statement                        
   3. EXCEL Mission Statement as relates to the Travel Program  
3. Staff  Roles and Responsibilities                                  
   1. Trip Leader/Chaperone Policies
   2. Trip Leader                                
   3. Trip Chaperone
   4. Administrator-in-Charge
   5. Leader/Chaperone Compensation                                                
4. Pre-trip Preparation                                        
   1. Itinerary                                        
   2. Flights                                        
   3. Risk Management                                 
   4. Finances                                        
   5. Health                                                
   6. Parent/Guardian/Student Communication                                        Bookmark
   7. Vetting                
5. On-the-ground Guidelines                                
   1. Trip Leader Expectations                                                
   2. Trip Management
   3. Health        
   4. Swimming & Recreational Activities                                 
   5. Transportation                                        
   6. Lodging
   7. Rooming Policy                                            
   8. Homestays                                                                
6. Post-trip Guidelines                                                                
7. Emergency Action Plan                                
8. Cell Phone & Wifi Enabled Devices Policy                
                        
1. Important Dates for Leaders - 2024-25 


Meetings and Training:
* Welcome Back Trip Leader meeting - Tues Aug 27th  3 pm AC 101
* Trip Leader Training & Preparation: Building your Roster - Wed Oct. 16th Lunch Blocks 11:10, 12:10 or 1:00, Castle Library  
* Trip Leader and Chaperone Training: Risk Management, Trip Culture & Community Building- Fri Nov 1st 9:30-Noon Lawrence Auditorium* 
* Trip Leader Training & Preparation: Budgeting &  Business Office  Mon, Jan 13th 4-5pm AC 101
* March EXCEL & Sports Trips Parent/Guardian & Student Mtg: Mon. Jan. 27th 7-8:30 pm Lawrence Auditorium*
* Trip Leader Training & Preparation: Leading On the Ground Reflections & Observations Feb 18th 1-3 pm AC 101 
* March Trip Final Meeting Mon. March 10th 3:15-4:15 pm - HAC209*
* June/Summer EXCEL Trips Parent/Guardian & Student Meeting: Tuesday, Apr. 15th 7-8:30 pm Lawrence Auditorium* 
* June/Summer Trip Final Meeting Tues., May 27th 3:15-4:15 pm HAC 209 *


* indicates that chaperones are required to attend
Bold indicates a new training


Action Items and Deadlines:
* Sign Up for Trip Assembly Announcement: August 29th 
* General Trip Info Due (Est. Costs, Website Description, etc.): Thursday, Sept. 12th
* Present Trip Assembly Announcement: Week of Sept 16th 
* 1st draft Trip Rosters due to EXCEL Office: Friday, October 25th at 8 am 
* Final Trip Rosters due to EXCEL Office: Wednesday, Nov. 6th at 8 am 


Application/Placement and Document Collection Timeline:
* Trip Applications open: Mon September 16th
* Trip Applications Due: Wed Oct. 16th at 8 am
* Trip & Financial Aid Decisions Released: Sun. Nov. 10th at 12pm
* Due Date for Students to Confirm Participation: Wed. Nov. 20
* Due Date for March Contract and Health Forms: Feb. 28th
* Spring Break: March 15-30 (trips can depart the evening of Friday, March 14th)
* Due Date for June Contract and Trip Forms: May 23rd
* June Trips can depart after faculty meetings on June 10th


Other 
* Travel/Study Away Parent/Guardian Info Meeting: Monday, Oct. 7th, 7-8 pm (virtual)
Trip Leaders NOT required to attend)


EXCEL Trip Student Meeting Times 
* Student Meeting #1 - Thursday 12/12 9:35-10:40 am
* Student Meeting #2 - Monday 1/13 9:35-10:40 am
* Student  Meeting #3 - Thursday 2/6/25, 9:35–10:40 am
* Student Meeting #4 - Wednesday  3/12/25, 8:25–8:55 am
* Student  Meeting #5 - Thursday  4/17/25, 9:35–10:40 am
* Student Meeting #6- April/May Community Time. Exact day TBD
* Chaperones should also attend Student Meetings 


Note: times conflict with clubs and org community time


2. Introduction
   1. Purpose of the Manual: The purpose of the trip leader manual is to guide trip leaders through each phase of trip planning, execution, and follow-up. Trip leaders should read the manual carefully and refer to it throughout trip planning. 


   2. Travel Mission Statement: In order for its graduates to become responsible, empathic, and skilled global citizens, Noble and Greenough School offers a variety of challenging domestic and international travel opportunities. Nobles creates and sustains long-term partnerships with like-minded organizations throughout the world.


At Nobles, students and adults work together on trips involving service learning, language immersion, cultural exchange, intellectual pursuit, and physical challenge.  These shared experiences develop in students an ethic of connectedness and a conviction that individuals can make a difference.


   3. EXCEL Mission Statement as relates to the Travel Program: The Nobles Travel Program is a critical part of Experiential and Community Engaged Learning at Nobles. EXCEL programs aim to:
• Promote student-initiated & project-based learning with substantive faculty interaction and support.
• Expose students to authentic, real-world challenges that require multidisciplinary analysis & response.
• Encourage students to problem-solve individually and collaboratively, develop research skills, navigate ambiguity, and respond to setbacks.
• Immerse students in unfamiliar communities and environments, expanding their view of themselves and the world.
• Push students to demonstrate their learning through substantial and shared final products.


3. Staff Roles and Responsibilities
   1. Leader/Chaperone Policies
      1. Leader/Chaperone Criteria
         1. Leaders and chaperones must be Nobles faculty or staff. In rare cases, former employees or other members of the extended Nobles community may join trip leadership if they possess particular expertise (i.e. language skills, medical skills, etc.) or particular knowledge of trip destination and partners, or if there is an extraordinary need for additional adult coverage.
      2. Spouse & Family Member Policy 
         1. Partners, children or family members of leaders and chaperones may not join trips, with the exception being if a child is a Nobles student who would otherwise be eligible for the trip and applies through the standard application process.
      3. Adult/Student Ratios
         1. 1:5 for “unsupported” trips
         2. 1:8 for “supported” trips (with partner organizations providing additional chaperone coverage) 
         3. We strongly encourage at least 3 chaperones for international trips
   2. Trip Leader
      1. All pre-trip planning: 
         1. Work with the EXCEL office to select chaperones
         2. Communicate any plans to split the planning stipend to the EXCEL office
         3. Budget and itinerary creation (logistics such as flight reservations, food & lodging, transportation, etc.)
         4. Communicate and organize with partners in-country, homestay set-up
         5. Communicate with and provide updates to the EXCEL travel team 
         6. Collect and organize paperwork
         7. Communicate with students and families and student-travelers
         8. Develop a pre-trip curriculum & implement it during pre-trip group meetings
         9. Keep all chaperones informed of planning, process, and follow-up, as well as delegate tasks as needed
         10. Attend risk management training 
         11. Attend and present during the parent/guardian meeting
      2. During the trip: 
         1. Itinerary management & maintaining communication with partners on the ground
         2. Be attuned to student well-being, group dynamic/engagement
         3. Organize debrief and reflection activities
         4. Communicate with parents/guardians daily 
         5. Manage the health and safety of the group and individuals.
      3. Post-trip: 
         1. Debrief post-trip with EXCEL travel team
         2. Finalize trip finances upon return with the business office
         3. Return iPads, Go Pros, and items borrowed from the EXCEL office
         4. Send post-trip survey to students 
   3. Trip Chaperone
      1. Pre-trip:
         1. Attend risk management trainings 
         2. Attend trip group meetings
         3. Attend and present during the parent/guardian meeting
         4. Decide with the Trip Leader any additional responsibilities
      2. During the trip: 
         1. Work as a team to support the trip objectives.
      3. Post-trip: 
         1. Debrief post-trip with EXCEL team
   4. Administrator-in-charge: 
      1. This is the administrator or group of administrators on call during the trip referred to in the Emergency Action Plan.
   5. Leader/Chaperone Compensation for the 2024-25 School Year
      1. For EXCEL rotation trips (6+ days): One trip leader will be paid $4,000 as a planning stipend. If leaders want to share the role among more than one person, dividing the planning stipend can be accommodated. Please clarify each team member's role and responsibility and communicate that to the EXCEL office as well as the chaperones before you ask them to participate in the planning, so each person’s time commitment matches their compensation. If the leader chooses to take the full stipend, they should understand they are responsible for the bulk of pre-trip planning. 
      2. All trip chaperones (including the trip leader) will be paid $150/night for each night of the trip. See the linked policy for compensation details. 
      3. A faculty or staff member who oversees an exchange during the reciprocal visit (when a partner school group visits Nobles) will receive a $150 per diem for each day of the visit for their work communicating with the partner, placing homestays, coordinating with Nobles hosts, and planning the group itinerary. This stipend may be split between multiple adults at the discretion of the trip leader if this is  communicated to the EXCEL office. 


4. Pre-trip Preparation
   1. Itinerary
      1. Create and share itinerary with the EXCEL travel team (sample here). Itinerary should include flight plans, all contact and emergency numbers, detailed daily activities, lodging, and transportation. This should be stored on your trip folder that was shared with you by the EXCEL team. 
      2. Attach a current itinerary in the initial trip acceptance email to students and parents/guardians.
   2. Flights
      1. Contact Student Universe to work out your itinerary.
Crista Cannata | Team Lead
D: +1 617 321 3256 | F: +1 617 321 3141
crista.cannata@corporatetraveler.us
         2. When you need to make deposits and payments, sign the agreement with Student Universe and then forward the flight contract to Ethan George and Darlene Donlan. The business office can make the payment on your behalf. Take note of the date by which you must submit traveler names/birthdates.
      2. Trip leaders can work directly with airlines if more convenient.
      3. If families inquire about deviating from the Nobles itinerary (meeting up with the group, staying longer in a destination or flying elsewhere after the trip, etc.), please direct them to our Deviation Policy (still a draft!). As a trip leader, you are also able to deny deviation requests if they have a significant impact on the group itinerary. 
      4. Some trip leaders have found more success using Easy Group Airfare as their travel agent for flights
   3. Risk Management 
      1. International trips:
         1. Research destination on ISOS website (www.internationalsos.com / member #:11BCAS088165). Read all health, security, and other country information. Sign-up for email alerts for your destination from ISOS and download the ISOS app to your phone. 
         2. Call ISOS (215-942-8478) to share your itinerary, get hospital/clinic recommendations, and any other health or safety concerns.
         3. Stay up-to-date with ISOS and State Department notifications. 
      2. Domestic Trips: ISOS (see contact info above) has resources available for select US cities. Set up Google Alerts for keywords related to your destinations to stay up to date with relevant events and situations. 
      3. Revise itinerary to mitigate risks. 
      4. Attend risk management training and complete training modules.
      5. Read and understand the Emergency Action Plan.
      6. All trip leaders and chaperones must be CPR certified. 
   4. Finances- This section Has New Information. 
      1. Budget Review/Approval
         1. Trip Leaders submit preliminary itineraries and budgets to EXCEL Office [in their trip folders] and schedule a meeting to walk through it with Ethan for budget approval.  
         2. The EXCEL office has placed a unique link for each trip budget in each trip folder. It is called the Dynamic Budget Tool. This is yours to customize. 
         3. After approval, it is up to the Trip Leader to track expenses and make sure you do not go over budget. 
      2. Making Payments/Purchases 
         1. Trip Leaders do not need approval for individual purchases that are related to their approved budget. Once the budget is approved they can proceed with booking and other corresponding reservations and purchases.
         2. Trip Leaders should cc Ethan George on their flight booking emails with Student Universe and EasyGroup Fare.  
         3. ACH/Wire payments will be requested to Darlene. Ethan George, and Lisa Durken should be cc’d.
         4. Trip Leaders who have Nobles Credit Cards can make trip purchases that correspond with their approved budget on their existing card. Large purchases like flights should be paid for by ACH or by wire to avoid fees
         5. Darlene Donlan in the business office will check the names of trip leaders against the list of staff/fac who do not have credit cards and order cards for the TLs who need them. These CCs will be returned and frozen after the trip.
         6. Trip Leaders who have not had a Nobles Credit Card in the past need to meet with Darlene in the business office for a brief overview of how to use Divvy to submit receipts. 
         7. If trip leaders need to pay an invoice by check or wire, save the invoice [in your trip folder] and link it to your budget document, ask Darlene to pay the invoice and CC Ethan George
      3. Credit Card Purchases:
         1. Trip Leaders/Card Holders use the individual trip codes to categorize expenses in Divvy.
         2. Card Holders will upload credit card receipts to Divvy
         3. Trip Leaders record the actual cost of purchases in US dollars located in the EXCEL Travel Dynamic Budget tool or in this stand-alone Expense Tracker spreadsheet. 
      4. Cash Purchases:
         1. Trip Leaders determine the amount of cash and currency needed
            1. The Dynamic Budget tool has a function that will calculate this for the user. 
            2. If you do not use the new budget tool you will need to do this yourself and indicate on your budget document how much cash you need. Then tag Ethan in a comment.  Please note if you would like specific Denominations. 
         2. Trip Leaders make sure the cash needs are recorded on their budget worksheet two weeks prior to departure.
         3. Ethan compiles the cash requests and denominations as a task in the Asana workflow and assigns it to Mary Wallace and the business office. (needs an email?)
         4. The business office will retrieve approved cash requests from the bank
         5. Trip Leaders will pick up their cash from the business office 1-3 days before departure. 
      5. Paying for items while on the trip:
         1. Trip Leaders use the analog or digital expense tracker to record the expenses they incur while traveling.
         2. For credit card payments, follow the same steps in the “Credit Card Purchases” Section
         3. For cash payments made directly to vendors:
            1. Collect receipts when possible 
            2. Record the amount spent in US Dollars on the budget worksheet  nightly and specify the content of purchase (ie. gelato for 20 people, a soccer ball for community tournament)
         4. For cash given to students for a specific purpose, tips or another situation where cash is paid and no receipt is given
            1. Record the total amount of cash distributed in the budget worksheet and for what purpose    (ie. $200 -$20 for 10 students airport dinner)
            2. Receipts are not needed
         5. Regularly compare actual spending to the approved budget to avoid exceeding the allocated funds        
      6. Reimbursements
         1. Trip Leaders should avoid paying for related trip costs with their own cards or money 
         2. International Charges on cell phone bills are an exception
            1. The cost of phone reimbursement should be included in the trip budgets
            2. Reimbursement should be submitted within 2 weeks after the trip
         3. Ubers or any other item being charged to the trip budget should utilize the Divvy card for payment.  
      7. Reconciliation:
         1. Trip Leaders return receipts and leftover cash directly to Mary Wallace in the business office within two weeks of return home.
         2. Trip Leaders submit any reimbursements to the business office within two weeks of return. 
      8. Tips for Building Trip Budgets:
         1. Budget carefully. We do not want to charge families more than they originally anticipated, nor do we want to overestimate trip costs, impacting financial aid budgeting.
         2. Consider the following:
            1. Donations made to partner organizations
            2. Ubers to and from BOS Logan if needed
            3. Snacks and waters
            4. Exchange trips budget by $100-200 per traveler to support partner visit to Nobles
            5. Gear /shirts 
         3. Tips for Managing Expenses
            1. Use the Dynamic Budgeting tool located in your trip folder. 
            2. Use the spending tracker located on a tab in that same document
            3. Create a Budget Subfolder in your trip folder to store invoices. 
            4. Designate one person, presumably a trip leader, to make all payments, collect receipts, and record purchases from the group.
            5. Nobles is a nonprofit and therefore tax exempt please use our tax ID to reduce spending 




   5. Health
      1. International Trips: In your trip acceptance communication, Iet families know that travelers must consult a travel clinic for any necessary vaccines or travel advice. 
      2. Meet with the Health Office to go over student medical history, especially issues that relate to traveling (i.e. allergies, medications, conditions, etc.) in advance of travel. Create allergy cards for applicable students, especially for non-English speaking countries.
      3. Make sure leaders and chaperones are aware of any relevant health issues for adults that could require attention on the trip.
   6. Parent/Guardian/Student Communications: Please cc the Assistant Director of EXCEL Ethan George on these communications. 
      1. Click here for Guidelines for Sending Trip Decisions
      2. Stay tuned for new guidance on how to collect trip contracts and med forms. 
      3. Click here to see an example of the presentation that the EXCEL travel team will give at the Parent/Guardian/Student Trip Meeting.
      4. Click here for what to cover in your break-out sessions of the Parent/Guardian/Student Trip Meeting.
      5. Click here to read the full cell phone policy for students. Determine a cell phone plan for all trip leaders. This could be phone rental at the destination or adding an international plan on an existing cell phone, to be reimbursed by the trip budget. 
      6. Create a trip Twitter or Instagram account or have a plan to communicate daily (blog/email during the trip), and let parents/guardians know how and when to expect it. If using social media, a maximum of 2 posts per day is sufficient. Share links with the EXCEL travel team.
   7. Student Preparation:
      1. Prior to departure, use group meeting time to help students understand the cultural and historical context of the communities on the itinerary. Click here for sample activities for group development and cross-cultural understanding. Below are some questions to consider in your meetings:
         1. What strengths or opportunities does this community have?
         2. What challenges and needs is this community facing?
         3. How is this community (or how do the organizations we are working with) addressing these challenges and needs? 
         4. How does the history of this place impact its present and future?
         5. How is this reflective of, or different from our home community?
   8. Vetting:
      1. Email these questions to transportation and recreational activity companies, particularly when working with a new vendor:
         1. How long has this company been conducting this kind of business?
         2. Is this a registered business entity? In what country? As what kind of organization?
         3. How many programs do you conduct each year?
         4. Do you routinely track all health, safety, and security incidents?
         5. Have you had any participant fatalities or serious incidents?
         6. What are your hiring and training requirements for field staff? To what extent do you vet your staff?
         7. Please describe your transportation strategy: licensed drivers, seat belts, vehicle inspection, etc.
         8. What kinds of insurance policies do you carry? 
         9. Does your company utilize any other vendors or providers for any of your program offerings? How are they vetted? 
        
5. On-the-ground guidelines
   1. Trip Leader/Chaperone Expectations 
      1. Anticipate & Adapt
* Read, understand, and execute the Trip Leader Manual and Emergency Action Plan as necessary
* Follow ISOS alerts and local news
* Stick to your itinerary, but be aware of when the plan should be modified
* Safety first: if in doubt, take it out!


      2. Communicate
* Get daily, one-on-one gut checks on students
* Encourage students to communicate injuries, illnesses, or other issues
* Share regular updates with families in the established avenues
* Reach out to the EXCEL travel team or admin-in-charge with updates, concerns, etc.


      3. Document
* Note each student’s relevant medications, allergies, and conditions
* Document all incidents (health, safety, security, student issues)
* Track finances daily


      4. Contextualize and Orient
* Set behavioral expectations, especially as related to cultural norms
* Prepare laminated emergency cards in advance with relevant info (addresses, cell, ISOS number, etc.)
* Remind students how to return to lodging/how to contact you and partners


      5. Be Present & Reflective
* Know and notice your students 
* Engage with group and environment
* Do not consume alcohol, mood-altering substances, or tobacco
* Carve out time for morning and evening reflection time


   2. Trip Management
      1. Confirm safe arrival at destination and back home with EXCEL travel team and Administrator-in-Charge.
      2. Ensure that local contact people have all Trip Leader and Administrator-in-charge numbers. 
      3. Create an emergency contact card to be shared with students. Ensure students know how to reach chaperones and how to get to lodging. Students should always have leader cell numbers, lodging information, and ISOS card (international travelers).
      4. Students should never be alone on the trip. With the exception of time with homestay families, students should always stay with at least one Nobles student no matter the circumstance. If a student leaves the group that student is subject to being sent home at family cost.
      5. Trip leaders should always carry the students’ passports except when they need to go through customs. Students should not handle their own passports other than that.
      6. Documentation: Keep detailed records of incidents (incident report template and actual example) and finances (receipts, budget tracking).
      7. Communication: Communicate as regularly as possible with parents/guardians via blog, email, or social media. 
   3. Health


      8. Carry the medkit with you at all times. Only leaders should administer treatment from the medkit.
      9. Encourage students to communicate any illness or skin injury as soon as it happens to avoid further problems. Document any and all issues so you have a record of symptom progression.
      10. Immediately before departing and throughout the trip, review health info for each student on the iPad so that you keep in mind allergies and other conditions that may affect travel.
      11. Medication distribution protocol:
         1. over-the-counter - student may carry and self-administer, signed medication form will list the over-the-counter medication that student will be carrying (ex. Tylenol, ibuprofen, allergy medication)
         2. prescription - student may carry and self-administer, physician's signed order will list the prescription medication that student will be carrying (ex. Epi-pens, inhalers, acne medication, prescription migraine medication)
         3. controlled substances - chaperone will carry, student will self-administer based on physician's signed order and instructions (ex. ADHD medication)
      12. In the event of a medical incident beyond simple treatment, call ISOS/911, follow the Emergency Action Plan, and document the incident. Inform the Administrator-in-Charge if the situation requires a visit to a hospital, clinic, or doctor.
      13. At least one leader should always accompany a student receiving medical care.
   4. Swimming & Recreational Activities
      1. Stick to the predetermined itinerary (activities, lodging, transportation), and if you need to modify it, inform the EXCEL travel team. Adapt and use this template for sharing and collecting information regarding recreational activities and swimming. 
      2. Swimming: 
         1. If there is a possibility of swimming on the trip, parents need to understand the type of swimming, sign off on the student’s ability to swim and give permission to swim with adult supervision. Location and conditions should be known by the leader, explained to students, and swimming should take place in a defined, supervised area. 
      3. Recreational activities (swimming, paintball, rafting, jet skis…)
         1. Activities must be consistent with the goals of the program.
         2. Appropriate waiver forms must be signed and safety guidelines reviewed with students before activity.
         3. Assure that requisite adult or expert supervision is present and appropriate safety equipment is used at all times. Students remain within vocal or visual contact with the leader.
         4. Groups should not participate in third-party activities not originally listed on the itinerary and shared with parents.
      4. Student time away from chaperones:
         1. Students may explore small, defined areas (a marketplace, etc.) in groups of at least three. Students must always know how to reach leaders and should check back in with the leaders no later than 1 hour after they separate. Programs in higher-risk locations should not allow students to be without trip leaders.
   5. Transportation 
      1. Students should not drive. Leaders must give permission for students to ride with anyone other than the trip leader or approved 3rd party transportation service.
      2. Vehicles should be stopped if the driver’s behavior is deemed unsafe or if necessary safety equipment is missing. Drivers should not text while driving our students. 
      3. Seatbelts should be worn at all times.
      4. Students should not ride in cars driven by exchange or host students.
      5. Students should not ride on motorized vehicles.
   6. Lodging 
      1. Lodging and the surrounding area should be safe and sanitary.
      2. Lodging should be equipped with fire alarms. If none are present, the group should move to new lodging.
      3. Leaders should familiarize students with lodging layouts and evacuation plans.
      4. Students should know where leaders are staying.
      5. Leaders should familiarize lodging staff with Nobles behavior expectations for students. Communicate with the staff to ensure students do not leave lodging without the leader’s permission. 
      6. Leaders should perform nightly room checks at lights out.
      7. After students are checked in at curfew,  they may not leave their designated room/area unless they are going to see a trip leader. If students are found out of their rooms after curfew they will be subject to discipline back at Nobles and possibly be sent home.
      8. Valuables should be locked at lodging whenever possible.
   7. Rooming policy
      1. Goals of Overnight Rooming Policy
         1. Create an inclusive sleeping space
         2. Affirm student gender identities
         3. Give space to rest and recuperate
         4. Provide semi-private areas for changing and personal hygiene
         5. Avoid sexual activity
      2. General Rooming Guidelines:
         1. Students will share rooming preferences with trip leaders through an “Overnight Preference Form” though no placements are guaranteed, and students cannot list romantic partners as roommates. Survey to include:
            1. Please list students on the trip with whom you feel comfortable rooming. 
            2. Is there anything else you would like to share to make your rooming situation as comfortable and safe as possible?
         2. Students have the right to request a personal/medical accommodation that affects communal sleeping arrangements.
         3. Rooming arrangements should default to each student having their own bed unless restricted by partner organizations or logistics. In those situations, leaders will work with student travelers in order to ensure their comfort.
         4. Whether on or off campus, students are expected to conduct themselves in a manner consistent with our community principles of honesty, respect for self, and respect for others.
      3. Shared Space Guidelines:
         1. Students should be encouraged to thoughtfully share space with other students: 
            1. Be considerate of shared spaces: keep them clean and split time with resources.
            2. Recognize that the room is a space to rest and respect that roommates’ sleep schedules might differ. 
            3. Avoid nudity with roommates, respect the privacy of your roommates, and use the bathroom or other private space to change clothes.
            4. Limit bathroom use to 1 person at a time.
   8. Homestays
      1. Ensure that the partner school conducts background checks on the adults living in residence at the homestay. 
      2. Communicate with all host families upon arrival to share relevant student information and to ensure families know how to contact the leaders.
      3. For each student, get a daily gut check on how the homestay relationship is going. Offer guidance on breaking the ice, dealing with homesickness, and making the most of the homestay experience.
      4. If host family parent/guardians will be away from home, make arrangements for the student to stay with another family until they return.
      5. Students should never consume alcohol in a homestay despite local laws that may allow it.


6. Post-trip guidelines
   1. Structure Student Debrief: 
      1. Student Trip Surveys: The EXCEL office will share a survey with you to share with your students, either at the end of the trip if you have downtime in an airport, in a post-trip meeting (March trips), or via email after the trip (June).  Send a reminder reminder email a week after the original to remind students. 
      2. Help students plan a way to process and share experiences with the wider Nobles community through assembly announcements, clubs & orgs events, fundraisers, etc.
      3. March Trips should plan a debrief or reunion activity for their group during the April EXCEL group community time.  
   2. Return borrowed items to EXCEL Office: iPads and chargers, ISOS cards, cameras, med kit, rapid tests, etc.
   3. Close finances: Turn in all receipts and budget documentation (including all trip expenses) to Mary Wallace who will work with Ethan in the EXCEL office to determine the final trip payment, to be charged to families.  Please wrap up trip expenses ASAP and no longer than 2 weeks after a trip returns to allow the Business Office to charge families in a timely manner. 
   4. Meet with EXCEL travel team to review the trip:
      1. How did you feel the trip went overall? High points? Low points?
      2. Anything unexpected? Anything you would change?
      3. Any upcoming changes with lodging, transportation, or partners we need to consider?
      4. Any supplies or materials you wish you had? Needed additions to the med kit?
      5. Any incidents on your trip that needed follow-up after you returned?
      6. What else would have been helpful to prepare students for this experience?
      7. Is there anything that the EXCEL travel team could be doing to better support you?


7. Emergency Action Plan
Click here for a visual representation of the policies below. 


   5. Definition of terms
      1. Trip leader: Faculty/staff member responsible for planning and executing the EXCEL trip and for student well being and supervision during the trip. 
      2. Trip chaperone: Faculty/staff member accompanying the trip leader and also responsible for student well being and supervision during the trip. 
      3. Administrator-in-charge: Administrator or group of admin on call to support trip leaders and chaperones  during the trip


   1. Safety policies for students
      1. All Nobles rules in The Guide apply on Nobles trips.
      2. Students must not leave the group without permission.
      3. Students must follow instructions given by the trip leader and trip chaperones.
      4. Cell phone policy must be followed.


   2. Safety policies for leaders
      1. First-aid kit and Trip iPad must be carried at all times by a trip leader or trip chaperone.
      2. Trip leaders and trip chaperones should have cell phones on at all times. 
      3. For international trips: store the ISOS number in your phones and make a test ISOS call upon landing at your destination.


   3. In the case of emergency:
      1. Assess the situation, determine if it is an emergency, and if so, what kind of emergency.  An emergency is a situation that is potentially life-threatening or beyond the control of the trip leader/trip chaperones and group.  An emergency is a 911 event. Examples include natural disasters, crime, political unrest, serious medical problems, or missing person. 
      2. Make sure the entire group is accounted for and stabilized. Make sure an adult is with the group at all times. If applicable, collect all communication devices from students.
      3. In all medical and security emergencies, immediately contact ISOS (international trips) or 911 (domestic trips). Depending on the situation, use the immediate and local resources (hospital/clinic/doctor; police; local embassy/consulate; local partner; travel consultant, etc.). For international trips, follow instructions from ISOS.
      4. Call the Nobles administrator-in-charge as indicated in the Additional Documents section of the iPad.
         1. The initial call is an informative call to share the course of events, as well as a time to seek advice and input and to obtain further assistance if necessary.  Do not contact families directly in an emergency situation.
         2. The administrator-in-charge will contact involved families and other necessary parties.  The administrator-in-charge will have all relevant information, all steps taken by the trip leader/trip chaperones up to this point, and a clear course of action from the trip leader/trip chaperones to let families know there is a safe and appropriate plan.  **Input can be obtained directly from the parents if the emergency is student-specific and their knowledge would be helpful in the situation or if permission for a medical procedure, medication, etc. is necessary. 
      5. Document the event as thoroughly as possible using the Incident Report form and/or the Report of Medical Examination or Treatment form found in the information folder.
      6. If approached by the media, refer all inquiries to the Head of School or Director of Communications. 


   4. Emergency Scenarios
      1. Injury/illness requiring a hospital visit 
         1. Contact ISOS/911. 
         2. In the case of a hospital visit, have the doctor fill out the Report of Medical Examination or Treatment form. Once as much information as possible has been gathered, call the administrator-in-charge.
         3. If evacuation is needed, the final decision should come from the parents after recommendations have been made by the trip leader/trip chaperones and doctors.  Maintain contact with ISOS.
      2. Student gets separated from the group
         1. If the separation involves public transportation, the student waits while one trip leader/trip chaperone comes back. Establish this protocol when you arrive at your destination.
         2. If a student is missing (i.e. doesn’t show up at an agreed meeting time/place), one chaperone stays with the group while the other works with local contacts and authorities to find the missing student.
         3. If an hour has passed and the separated student has not been found, call the administrator-in-charge and call ISOS/911.
         4. Students on international trips can call ISOS.
      3. Trip leader/trip chaperone is seriously sick or injured
         1. Contact ISOS/911 and implement their recommendations.
         2. Call the administrator-in-charge.
         3. Use the local contact person for assistance.
         4. Rework itinerary as needed.
      4. Theft or criminal activity
         1. Make sure the individual and/or group is safe.
         2. Call ISOS/911.
         3. A trip leader/trip chaperone and the theft or crime victim(s) should go to the local police station, file a crime report, and keep a copy of all documents.
         4. If a passport is stolen/lost, contact ISOS.
      5. Terrorist situation/natural disaster 
         1. Contact ISOS/911.
         2. Call the administrator-in-charge.
         3. If information is not readily available within the affected country, have the administrator in charge monitor the situation and communicate important updates back to the trip leader/trip chaperones.
         4. Change itinerary as needed, always keeping the administrator-in-charge informed of changes.
         5. Use the local consulate/embassy for advice; if the recommendation is to leave, make plans to evacuate.


8. Cell Phone & Wifi Enabled Device Policy:


Students may not have cell phones or wireless devices during their Nobles trip. While we recognize the desire to be in touch, our reasons for prohibiting cell phone and wireless use include:


1. Use of cell phones during the trip detracts from the trip’s goal, which is unifying the group in a common cause and/or experience, away from the Nobles campus.


2. Nobles has developed an Emergency Action Plan tailored to our school trips. Under this plan, there are specific protocols for dealing with emergencies, including supporting resources and an administrator-in-charge for communication. If an emergency occurs during a trip, the Nobles trip leaders and trip chaperones will be equipped to assist the students and ensure their safety. The trip leaders and trip chaperones also will be in charge of communicating necessary information to point people back at Nobles, who will, in turn, communicate with Nobles families. If students use cell phones in an emergency situation, the Emergency Action Plan will be compromised and thus will not be effective. 


Given that cell phones are multifunctional, we request that you find other ways to play music and take pictures while on the trip. Old cell phones, cell phones with SIM cards removed, and other wireless devices (Kindle, iPad, iPod Touch, Apple Watch, etc.) are not allowed on the trip.


In certain situations when students are not with the trip leader (i.e. for a homestay) trip leaders will give students local cell phones to use in the event of an emergency.